let's bring in muan Rani is a
non-resident fellow at the center of
conflict and humanitarian studies and a
co-editor of Jalia an online magazine
joins us now live from Montreal good to
have you with us on the program do you
think there's appeals from the UN or
even the US state department are going
to be heard by Tel Aviv or will they
just fall on deaf
ears I think they'll fall on their fears
as they've fallen on their fears for
over half a century um you know the the
State Department spokesman expresses
concern about these issues imagine if
the Palestinian Authority was arming
Hamas and Islamic Jihad I suspect we'd
hear a lot more than just verbal concern
uh from the state department the problem
here is that this extremist settler
violence is not the problem itself it's
a symptom of a much larger problem which
is Israel's governmental policy of
territorial expansionism in the West
Bank
since
1967 these settlers are armed by the
Israeli State they operate under the
offices and with the protection of the
Israeli military so to address settler
violence
independently of Israeli state and
government policy um doesn't really make
uh much sense it's it's the equivalent
of addressing the symptoms while doing
nothing about the cause we often hear
that the only way that Palestinians in
the occupied West Bank can defend
themselves is by throwing stones so our
viewers to this channel May wonder where
are the Palestinian Authority those that
are supposed to protect the Palestinians
if you could just clarify what their
role is in the occupied World
Bank yes it's a very good question and
and the answer to it is that the role of
the Palestinian Authority Security
Forces is not to defend Palestinians
from attacks by Israelis but rather to
protect Israel and its occupation from
resistance by its own people the
Palestinian Authority security forces
are prohibited from operating in those
areas outside the main cities where most
of the settler violence um take place
and they've also taken a political
decision to actively cooperate with
Israel's Army of occupation in order to
um prevent Palestinian resistance to
exactly these kinds of instances of
settler violence that we're discussing
now so the Palestinian Authority is
simply not a factor in this equation
except that it can be seen as yet
another auxiliary of Israel's
expansionist policy in the occupied West
Bank so in terms of the relationship
between Palestinian civilians and their
own authority who they would look to to
protect them and they know that they
can't what are the options then because
when pal Palestinians do fight back the
Israeli response is very
heavy-handed well yes and and and just
to clarify that Palestinians in these
Villages um that are again located
outside the main towns and cities where
the Palestinian Authority Security
Forces operate they don't look to the
Palestinian Authority for protection
they know they're not going to get any
um from the Palestinian Authority so
what they do is they defend themselves
as best they can and it's also in this
situation that you've had the emergence
of armed militias particularly in the
northern West Bank um to more actively
resist not only uh the settlers but also
the Israeli military which um in the
larger scheme of things is a forms a
much bigger problem for Palestinian
rights than do the
settlers we've seen over this last
weekend uh the violence increase over
the scenario of a settler teenager being
found dead and Netanyahu describing it
as a heus crime and yet unable to talk
about any of the other crimes committed
against the Palestinians I suppose
that's something that we expect but
again to the viewer it just seems that
when you are
occupied that you should take some
responsibility for being the
occupier well that's certainly the case
under international law um Israel of
course views itself as the victim of
those that it occupies uh rather than
the aggressor against them and again the
fundamental problem here is that Israel
has an agenda of territorial expansion
leading ultimately to the formal
annexation of these territories Israel's
Western allies have chosen a policy of
effectively active support or passive
acquiescence their opposition to these
Israeli policies never extends Beyond
verbal admins and as long as that
changes the UN can point to Israel's
responsibilities to reign in um settler
violence as much as it wants but within
the framework of what every human rights
situ organization that has looked at
this has determined as a situation of
apartheid um nothing will change
sometimes with such a complicated story
it's always good to get back to basics
to help our audience understand what's
going on so Moon Rani thanks so much for
uh unpicking the situation for us thank
you thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer